PEP 728: TypedDict with Typed Extra Fields (#3441)
python/peps: peps/pep-0728.rst

PEP: 728
Title: TypedDict with Typed Extra Fields
Author: Zixuan James Li <zixuan.li@nyu.edu>
Sponsor: Alex Waygood <alex.waygood@gmail.com>

> Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-692-using-typeddict-for-more-precise-kwargs-typing/17314

Reviewer: Should be a new thread, not the one for PEP 692

Author: Before this is merged, should I create a new "Typing" thread or leave it blank until a "pep" thread can be created?

of ``__extra__``.

There are some advantages to this approach:

- Inheritance works naturally. ``__extra__`` defined on a TypedDict will also
  be available to its subclasses.

- We can build on top of
  :pep:`the type consistency rules defined in PEP 589 <589#type-consistency>`.
  ``__extra__`` can be treated as a pseudo-key in terms of type consistency.

- There is no need to introduce a syntax to specify the type of the extra
  fields.

- We can precisely type the extra fields without making ``__extra__`` the union
  of known fields.

Specification
=============

This specification is structured to parallel :pep:`589` to highlight changes to
the original TypedDict specification.

Extra fields are treated as non-required fields having the same type of
``__extra__`` whose keys are allowed when determining
:pep:`supported and unsupported operations <589>`.

Using TypedDict Types
---------------------

For a TypedDict type that has the ``__extra__`` field, during construction, the
value type of each unknown field is expected to be non-required and compatible
with the type of ``__extra__``. For example::

    class Movie(TypedDict):
        name: str
        __extra__: bool
    

>     a: Movie = {"name": "Blade Runner", "novel_adaption": True}  # OK

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    a: Movie = {"name": "Blade Runner", "novel_adaptation": True}  # OK
```

        __extra__: int | None
    
    class Child(Parent):
        __extra__: int  # Not OK. Like any other TypedDict field, __extra__'s type cannot be changed

Second, ``__extra__`` effectively defines the type of any unnamed fields
accepted to the TypedDict and marks them as non-required. Thus, the above
restriction applies to any additional fields defined in a subclass. For each
field added in a subclass, all of the following conditions should apply:

- The field is non-required

- The field's value type is consistent with the type of ``__extra__``

- The type of ``__extra__`` is consistent with the field's value type

For example::

    class MovieBase(TypedDict):
        name: str
        __extra__: int | None
    
    class AdaptedMovie(MovieBase):  # Not OK. 'bool' is not consistent with 'int | None'
        adapted_from_novel: bool
 
    class MovieRequiredYear(MovieBase):  # Not OK. Required key 'x' is not known to 'Parent'
        year: int | None

    class MovieNotRequiredYear(MovieBase):  # Not OK. 'int | None' is not consistent with 'int'
        year: NotRequired[int]

    class MovieWithYear(MovieBase):  # OK
        x: NotRequired[int | None]

> As a side-effect, annotating ``__extra__`` with :class:`typing.Never` for a

Reviewer 2: It may be worth making this change much louder than as a side-effect.

This is a key feature people have wanted independent of the more general question of typing extra fields, and in fact type checkers have at times used `@final` for this but there's a very reasonable view that `@final` is inappropriate.

I brought up the problem of exact TypedDict in [this typing thread](https://discuss.python.org/t/do-we-want-an-exact-typeddict-if-so-how-final-extras-never/44418/4) and @erictraut pointed me at PEP 728, but it took me a little while to find this aside.

Author: Updated the PEP to extend on this topic.

in mypy, we want it to be as simple as possible, reusing the existing type
checking logic:

    There is nothing cumbersome in reducing the PEP to just one paragraph that
    would explain that `Unpack[SomeTD]` is a syntactic sugar for (and is
    considered equivalent to) the expanded signature. This has a number of
    benefits:

    * This will not add any new unsafety that is not already present for
      existing uses of TypedDicts in `**` contexts. (And type checkers may
      handle this unsafety in a uniform way, say in mypy we _may_ use existing
      `--extra-checks` flag to prohibit some techincally unsafe calls as I
      mentioned before.)

    * This is actually easy to remember and to reason about.

    * This will allow people who want subtyping between callables to easily
      achieve this using `total=False`, which follows from existing rules for
      expanded callables.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Dunder attributes like ``__extra__`` are reserved for stdlib, we need not
concerned about using it in this proposal. If the proposal is accepted, neither
``__required_keys__`` and ``__optional_keys__`` should include ``__extra__`` in
runtime.

> Because this is a type-checking feature, it can be made available to older

Reviewer: Or even without typing_extensions. The PEP as currently written would require few if any changes to the runtime implementation.

Author: Also regarding alternatives to `__extra__`, I think something like this will not require changes to the runtime implementation at all:
```
    class Foo(TypedDict):
        def __extra_field__(self, key: str) -> int:
            ...
```

versions when TypedDict is imported from ``typing_extensions``, and type
checkers should handle ``__extra__`` in that case.

Rejected Ideas
==============

Allowing Extra Fields without Specifying the Type
-------------------------------------------------

``extra=True`` was originally proposed for defining a TypedDict accept extra
fields regardless of the type, like how ``total=True`` works::

    class TypedDict(extra=True):
        pass

Because it did not offer a way to specify the type of the extra fields, the type
checkers will need to assume that the type of the extra fields are ``Any``,
which compromises type safety. Furthermore, the current behavior of TypedDict
already allows untyped extra fields to be present in runtime, due to structural
subtyping.

Supporting ``TypedDict(extra=type)``
------------------------------------

This adds more corner cases to determine whether a type should be treated as a
type or a value. And it will require more work to support using special forms to
type the extra fields.

While this saves us from reserving an attribute for special use, it will require
extra work to implement inheritance, and it is less natural to integrate with

> generics if we support generic TypedDict types in the future.

Reviewer: We already support generic TypedDicts, there's no "future" about it.

when it is expected that the TypedDict type contains no additional fields.

Due to the possible presence of extra fields, type checker cannot infer more
precise return types for ``.items()`` and ``.values()`` on a TypedDict. This can
also be resolved by
`defining a closed TypedDict type <https://github.com/python/mypy/issues/7981>`__.

Another possible use case for this is a sound way to
`enable type narrowing <https://github.com/python/mypy/issues/9953>`__ with the
``in`` check::

    class Movie(TypedDict):
        name: str
        director: str
    
    class Book(TypedDict):
        name: str
        author: str

    def fun(entry: Movie | Book) -> None:
        if "author" in entry:
            add_book(entry)  # Not OK

Nothing prevents a ``dict`` that is structurally compatible with ``Movie`` to
have the ``author`` key, and it would be correct for the type checker to reject
the ``add_book`` call.

Allowing Extra Fields of a Certain Type
---------------------------------------

For supporting API interfaces or legacy codebase where only a subset of possible
keys are known, it would be useful to explicitly expect additional keys of
certain value types.

> However, :pep:`589` is more restrictive on type checking the construction of a

Reviewer: Nit: We should ideally frame this around the current typing spec, which derives from PEP 589 but can be changed independently.

TypedDict, `preventing the users <https://github.com/python/mypy/issues/4617>`__
from doing this::

    class MovieBase(TypedDict):
        name: str

    def fun(movie: MovieBase) -> None:
        # movie can have extra fields that are not visible through MovieBase
        ...

    movie: MovieBase = {"name": "Blade Runner", "year": 1982}  # Not OK
    fun({"name": "Blade Runner", "year": 1982})  # Not OK

While the restriction is enforced when constructing a TypedDict, due to

> structural subtyping, the TypedDict is flexible enough to have extra fields that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
structural subtyping, the TypedDict may have extra fields that
```
More concise wording

Using TypedDict Types
---------------------

For a TypedDict type that has the ``__extra__`` field, during construction, the
value type of each unknown field is expected to be non-required and compatible
with the type of ``__extra__``. For example::

    class Movie(TypedDict):
        name: str
        __extra__: bool
    
    a: Movie = {"name": "Blade Runner", "novel_adaptation": True}  # OK
    b: Movie = {
        "name": "Blade Runner",
        "year": 1982,  # Not OK. 'int' is incompatible with 'bool'
    }  

In this example, ``__extra__: bool`` does not mean that ``Movie`` has a required
string key "__extra__" whose value type is ``bool``. Instead, it specifies that
fields other than "name" have a value type of ``bool`` and are non-required.

The alternative inline syntax is also supported::

    Movie = TypedDict("Movie", {"name": str, "__extra__": bool})

Accessing extra fields is allowed. Type checkers must infer its value type from
the type of ``__extra__``::

    def f(movie: Movie, key: str) -> None:
        reveal_type(movie["name"])  # Revealed type is 'str'
        reveal_type(movie["year"])  # Revealed type is 'int'

> Interaction with Totality

Reviewer: We'll also need to specify the interaction with PEP 705. It seems to me that `ReadOnly` should be allowed on `__extra__`, with the obvious meaning: all the extra fields are read-only.

Second, ``__extra__`` effectively defines the type of any unnamed fields
accepted to the TypedDict and marks them as non-required. Thus, the above
restriction applies to any additional fields defined in a subclass. For each
field added in a subclass, all of the following conditions should apply:

- The field is non-required

- The field's value type is consistent with the type of ``__extra__``

- The type of ``__extra__`` is consistent with the field's value type

For example::

    class MovieBase(TypedDict):
        name: str
        __extra__: int | None
    
    class AdaptedMovie(MovieBase):  # Not OK. 'bool' is not consistent with 'int | None'
        adapted_from_novel: bool
 
    class MovieRequiredYear(MovieBase):  # Not OK. Required key 'year' is not known to 'Parent'
        year: int | None

    class MovieNotRequiredYear(MovieBase):  # Not OK. 'int | None' is not consistent with 'int'
        year: NotRequired[int]

    class MovieWithYear(MovieBase):  # OK
        year: NotRequired[int | None]

Due to this nature, an important side effect allows us to define a TypedDict

> type that acts similarly to decorating the class definition with ``@final``::

Reviewer: The current consensus is that `@final` has no meaning on TypedDict, so we should not mention it here. Instead, this means that additional keys are disallowed.

    class MovieFinal(TypedDict):
        name: str
        __extra__: Never

> Here, annotating ``__extra__`` with :class:`typing.Never` prevents ``MovieFinal``

Reviewer: This isn't necessarily true under PEP 705 (since you could have a read-only item with a type you refine in a subclass). Also, pyright allows this (I think correctly):

```
from typing import Any, TypedDict

class TD1(TypedDict):
    x: list[Any]
    
class TD2(TD1):
    x: list[str]
```

More generally, I don't think "inheritance" is the right concept to talk about here. Because TypedDicts are structural types, inheritance isn't very important: you can get exactly the same type just by copy-pasting all the fields. What `__extra__: Never` does is say that there can be no other items in the TypedDict, whether in a subclass or otherwise.

      corresponding key.]

    * For each required key in ``B``, the corresponding key is required in
      ``A``.  For each non-required key in ``B``, the corresponding key is not
      required in ``A``. [Edit: if the corresponding non-required key with the
      same name cannot be found in ``A``, "__extra__" is considered the
      corresponding key.]

The following examples illustrate these checks in action.

``__extra__`` as a pseudo-field follows the same rules that other fields have,
so when both TypedDict contains ``__extra__``, this check is naturally
enforced::

    class MovieExtraInt(TypedDict):
        name: str
        __extra__: int

    class MovieExtraStr(TypedDict):
        name: str
        __extra__: str
    
    extra_int: MovieExtraInt = {"name": "No Country for Old Men", "year": 2007}
    extra_str: MovieExtraStr = {"name": "No Country for Old Men", "description": ""}
    extra_int = extra_str  # Not OK. 'str' is inconsistent with 'int' for field '__extra__'
    extra_str = extra_int  # Not OK. 'int' is inconsistent with 'str' for field '__extra__'
    
When only one of the TypedDict ``t`` has ``__extra__``, then the keys unknown to

> ``t`` in the other TypedDict corresponds to the ``__extra__`` pseudo-field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``t`` in the other TypedDict correspond to the ``__extra__`` pseudo-field.
```

                               # 'extra_int'
    not_required_year = extra_int  # OK.

A TypedDict can be consistent with ``Mapping[...]`` types other than
``Mapping[str, object]`` as long as the union of value types on all fields is
consistent with the value type of the ``Mapping[...]`` type. It is an extension
to this rule::

    * A TypedDict with all ``int`` values is not consistent with
      ``Mapping[str, int]``, since there may be additional non-``int``
      values not visible through the type, due to structural subtyping.
      These can be accessed using the ``values()`` and ``items()``
      methods in ``Mapping``

For example::

    extra_str: MovieExtraStr = {"name": "Blade Runner", "summary": ""}
    str_mapping: Mapping[str, str] = extra_str  # OK

    int_mapping: Mapping[str, int] = extra_int  # Not OK. 'int | str' is not consistent with 'int'
    int_str_mapping: Mapping[str, int | str] = extra_int  # OK

Note that because the presence of ``__extra__`` prohibits required keys from
being added through inheritance, it is possible to determine if a TypedDict type
and its structural subtypes will never have any required key during static
analysis.

> If there is no required key, the TypedDict type is consistent with ``Dict[...]``

Reviewer: `Dict` is deprecated, use `dict`. Maybe write `dict[KT, VT]` so you have a way to talk about `VT` instead of "the value type".

properties' types to match the string index's type. For example:

.. code-block:: typescript

    interface MovieWithExtraNumber {
        name: string // Property 'name' of type 'string' is not assignable to 'string' index type 'number'.
        [index: string]: number
    }

    interface MovieWithExtraNumberOrString {
        name: string // OK
        [index: string]: number | string
    }

This is a known limitation is discussed in TypeScript's issue tracker [9]_,
where it is suggested that there should be a way to exclude the defined keys
from the index signature, so that it is possible to define a type like
``MovieWithExtraNumber``.

A workaround is to use intersection:

.. code-block:: typescript

    interface MovieExtras {
        [index: string]: number
    }

    interface MovieBase {
        name: string
    }

    type Movie = MovieExtras & MovieBase

However, this does not work for assignment:

.. code-block:: typescript

    const movie: Movie = {
        name: "No Country for Old Men", // Type 'string' is not assignable to type 'number'
        year: 2007,
    }

How Else Will This Interact with PEP 692?

> -----------------------------------------

Reviewer: It's not clear what the concrete open issue is here.

Author: Got it removed. I think the "Interaction with `Unpack`" section should be sufficient.

    * This will not add any new unsafety that is not already present for
      existing uses of TypedDicts in `**` contexts. (And type checkers may
      handle this unsafety in a uniform way, say in mypy we _may_ use existing
      `--extra-checks` flag to prohibit some techincally unsafe calls as I
      mentioned before.)

    * This is actually easy to remember and to reason about.

    * This will allow people who want subtyping between callables to easily
      achieve this using `total=False`, which follows from existing rules for
      expanded callables.

Alternatives to the ``__extra__`` Magic Field
---------------------------------------------

As it was pointed out in the PEP 705 review comment [11]_, ``__extra__``
as a field has some disadvantages, including not allowing "__extra__"
as a regular key, requiring special-handling to disallow ``Required`` 
and ``NotRequired``. There could be some better alternatives to this
without the above mentioned issues.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

While dunder attributes like ``__extra__`` are reserved for stdlib, it is still
a limitation that ``__extra__`` is no longer usable as a regular key. If the

> proposal is accepted, neither ``__required_keys__`` and ``__optional_keys__``

Reviewer: As well as PEP 705's additions, I think `__readonly_keys__`.

with the type of ``__extra__``. For example::

    class Movie(TypedDict):
        name: str
        __extra__: bool
    
    a: Movie = {"name": "Blade Runner", "novel_adaptation": True}  # OK
    b: Movie = {
        "name": "Blade Runner",
        "year": 1982,  # Not OK. 'int' is incompatible with 'bool'
    }  

In this example, ``__extra__: bool`` does not mean that ``Movie`` has a required
string key "__extra__" whose value type is ``bool``. Instead, it specifies that
fields other than "name" have a value type of ``bool`` and are non-required.

The alternative inline syntax is also supported::

    Movie = TypedDict("Movie", {"name": str, "__extra__": bool})

Accessing extra fields is allowed. Type checkers must infer its value type from
the type of ``__extra__``::

    def f(movie: Movie) -> None:
        reveal_type(movie["name"])              # Revealed type is 'str'
        reveal_type(movie["novel_adaptation"])  # Revealed type is 'bool'

Interaction with PEP 705
------------------------

When ``__extra__`` is annotated with ``ReadOnly[]``, the extra fields on the
TypedDict have the properties of read-only fields. This affects subclassing

> according to the inheritance rules specified in :pep:`PEP 705 <589#Inheritance>`.

Reviewer: Wrong link

Notably, a subclass of the TypedDict type may redeclare the type of ``__extra__``
or extra fields if the TypedDict type declares ``__extra__`` to be read-only.

Interaction with Totality
-------------------------

It is an error to use ``Required[]`` or ``NotRequired[]`` with the special
``__extra__`` field. ``total=False`` and ``total=True`` have no effect on
``__extra__`` itself.

The extra fields are non-required, regardless of the totality of the TypedDict.
Operations that are available to ``NotRequired`` fields should also be available
to the extra fields::

>     def f(movie: Movie) -> None:

Reviewer: Might be better to repeat the definition of the `Movie` class here, since it's some way away.

PEP: 728
Title: TypedDict with Typed Extra Items
Author: Zixuan James Li <p359101898@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Jelle Zijlstra <jelle.zijlstra@gmail.com>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Typing
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 12-Sep-2023
Python-Version: 3.13

> .. highlight:: rst

Reviewer 3: Please remove this, the code blocks should default to Python instead.

Author: Was wondering about why that was happening. Thanks for spotting that!

Open Issues
===========

Alternatives to the ``__extra__`` Reserved Key
----------------------------------------------

As it was pointed out in the `PEP 705 review comment
<https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-705-typeddict-read-only-and-other-keys/36457/6>`__,
``__extra__`` as a reserved item has some disadvantages, including not allowing
"__extra__" as a regular key, requiring special handling to disallow
``Required`` and ``NotRequired``. There could be some better alternatives to
this without the above-mentioned issues.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

While dunder attributes like ``__extra__`` are reserved for stdlib, it is still
a limitation that ``__extra__`` is no longer usable as a regular key. If the
proposal is accepted, none of ``__required_keys__``, ``__optional_keys__``,
``__readonly_keys__`` and ``__mutable_keys__`` should include ``__extra__`` in
runtime.

Because this is a type-checking feature, it can be made available to older
versions as long as the type checker supports it.

Rejected Ideas
==============

Allowing Extra Items without Specifying the Type
------------------------------------------------

> ``extra=True`` was originally proposed for defining a TypedDict accept extra

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``extra=True`` was originally proposed for defining a TypedDict that accepts extra
```

For example:

.. code-block:: typescript

    interface MovieWithExtraNumber {
        name: string // Property 'name' of type 'string' is not assignable to 'string' index type 'number'.
        [index: string]: number
    }

    interface MovieWithExtraNumberOrString {
        name: string // OK
        [index: string]: number | string
    }

This is a known limitation is discussed in `TypeScript's issue tracker
<https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript/issues/17867>`__,
where it is suggested that there should be a way to exclude the defined keys
from the index signature, so that it is possible to define a type like
``MovieWithExtraNumber``.

Reference Implementation
========================

pyanalyze has `experimental support
<https://github.com/quora/pyanalyze/blob/9bfc2c58467c87774a9950838402d2657b1486a0/pyanalyze/extensions.py#L590>`__
for a similar feature.

Reference implementation for this specific proposal, however, is not currently
available.

Acknowledgments
===============

Thanks to Jelle Zijlstra for sponsoring this PEP and providing review feedback,
Eric Traut who `proposed the original design

> <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/typing-sig@python.org/message/3Z72OQWVTOVS6UYUUCCII2UZN56PV5II/>`

Reviewer 3: This isn't rendering as a link properly, I think it needs a  couple of underscores at the end?

PEP: 728
Title: TypedDict with Typed Extra Items
Author: Zixuan James Li <p359101898@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Jelle Zijlstra <jelle.zijlstra@gmail.com>
Discussions-To:
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Typing
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 12-Sep-2023
Python-Version: 3.13
Post-History:

.. highlight:: rst

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes a way to type extra items for :class:`~typing.TypedDict` using
a reserved ``__extra__`` key. This addresses the need to define a subset of
keys that might appear in a ``dict`` while permitting additional items of a
specified type, and the need to create a closed TypedDict type with ``__extra__:
Never``.

Motivation
==========

> A :py:data:`typing.TypedDict` type can annotate the value type of each known

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A :py:class:`typing.TypedDict` type can annotate the value type of each known
```
Sorry for this, it's documented as a class not a data

PEP: 728
Title: TypedDict with Typed Extra Items
Author: Zixuan James Li <p359101898@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Jelle Zijlstra <jelle.zijlstra@gmail.com>
Discussions-To:
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Typing
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 12-Sep-2023
Python-Version: 3.13
Post-History:

.. highlight:: rst

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes a way to type extra items for :class:`~typing.TypedDict` using

> a reserved ``__extra__`` key. This addresses the need to define a subset of

Reviewer: Noting for the record that I'm not completely happy with this syntax, because it feels wrong to pick one specific key to special-case. However, other possible solutions also have problems, and I'm OK with merging the PEP as is; the PEP discussion can cover possible alternatives.

If we do stick with this version, I'd prefer the shorter name `__extra__` over `__extra_keys__`. The longer name doesn't really make a collision much less likely.

keys that might appear in a ``dict`` while permitting additional items of a
specified type, and the need to create a closed TypedDict type with ``__extra__:
Never``.

Motivation
==========

> A TypedDict type can annotate the value type of each known item from
> dictionaries. However, due to structural subtyping, the TypedDict can have extra
> items that are not visible through its type. There is currently not a way to
> limit or restrict the value type of items that might be present in the TypedDict
> type's structural subtype.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A :py:data:`typing.TypedDict` type can annotate the value type of each known item in
a dictionary. However, due to structural subtyping, a TypedDict can have extra
items that are not visible through its type. There is currently no way to
restrict the types of items that might be present in the TypedDict
type's structural subtypes.
```
Editing

Defining a Closed TypedDict Type
--------------------------------

> In practice, this prevents users from defining a closed TypedDict type
> when it is expected that the TypedDict type contains no additional items.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current behavior of TypedDict prevents users from defining a closed TypedDict type
when it is expected that the type contains no additional items.
```

Due to the possible presence of extra items, type checker cannot infer more
precise return types for ``.items()`` and ``.values()`` on a TypedDict. This can
also be resolved by
`defining a closed TypedDict type <https://github.com/python/mypy/issues/7981>`__.

Another possible use case for this is a sound way to
`enable type narrowing <https://github.com/python/mypy/issues/9953>`__ with the
``in`` check::

    class Movie(TypedDict):
        name: str
        director: str
    
    class Book(TypedDict):
        name: str
        author: str

    def fun(entry: Movie | Book) -> None:
        if "author" in entry:
            reveal_type(entry)  # Revealed type is 'Movie | Book'

Nothing prevents a ``dict`` that is structurally compatible with ``Movie`` to

> have the ``author`` key, and it would be correct for the type checker to not 
> narrow its type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have the ``author`` key, and under the current specification it would be incorrect for the type checker to 
narrow its type.
```

Allowing Extra Items of a Certain Type
---------------------------------------

For supporting API interfaces or legacy codebase where only a subset of possible
keys are known, it would be useful to explicitly expect additional keys of
certain value types.

However, the typing spec is more restrictive on type checking the construction of a

> TypedDict, `preventing the users <https://github.com/python/mypy/issues/4617>`__

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TypedDict, `preventing users <https://github.com/python/mypy/issues/4617>`__
```

from doing this::

    class MovieBase(TypedDict):
        name: str

    def fun(movie: MovieBase) -> None:
        # movie can have extra items that are not visible through MovieBase
        ...

    movie: MovieBase = {"name": "Blade Runner", "year": 1982}  # Not OK
    fun({"name": "Blade Runner", "year": 1982})  # Not OK

While the restriction is enforced when constructing a TypedDict, due to

> structural subtyping, the TypedDict is may have extra items that are not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
structural subtyping, the TypedDict may have extra items that are not
```

visible through its type. For example::

    class Movie(MovieBase):
        year: int

    movie: Movie = {"name": "Blade Runner", "year": 1982}
    fun(movie)  # OK

It is not possible to acknowledge the existence of the extra items through

> ``in`` check and access them without breaking type safety, even though they

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``in`` checks and access them without breaking type safety, even though they
```

signatures, the types of known items do not need to be consistent with the value
type of ``__extra__``.

There are some advantages to this approach:

- Inheritance works naturally. ``__extra__`` defined on a TypedDict will also
  be available to its subclasses.

- We can build on top of the `type consistency rules defined in the typing spec
  <https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/spec/typeddict.html#type-consistency>`__.
  ``__extra__`` can be treated as a pseudo-item in terms of type consistency.

- There is no need to introduce a syntax to specify the type of the extra items.

- We can precisely type the extra items without making ``__extra__`` the union
  of known items.

Specification
=============

This specification is structured to parallel :pep:`589` to highlight changes to
the original TypedDict specification.

Extra items are treated as non-required items having the same type of
``__extra__`` whose keys are allowed when determining
`supported and unsupported operations
<https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/spec/typeddict.html#supported-and-unsupported-operations>`__.

Using TypedDict Types
---------------------

> For a TypedDict type that has the "__extra__" key, during construction, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a TypedDict type that has the ``__extra__`` key, during construction, the
```

value type of each unknown item is expected to be non-required and compatible
with the value type of ``__extra__``. For example::

    class Movie(TypedDict):
        name: str
        __extra__: bool
    
    a: Movie = {"name": "Blade Runner", "novel_adaptation": True}  # OK
    b: Movie = {
        "name": "Blade Runner",
        "year": 1982,  # Not OK. 'int' is incompatible with 'bool'
    }  

In this example, ``__extra__: bool`` does not mean that ``Movie`` has a required

> string key "__extra__" whose value type is ``bool``. Instead, it specifies that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
string key ``"__extra__"`` whose value type is ``bool``. Instead, it specifies that
```

keys other than "name" have a value type of ``bool`` and are non-required.

The alternative inline syntax is also supported::

    Movie = TypedDict("Movie", {"name": str, "__extra__": bool})

Accessing extra keys is allowed. Type checkers must infer its value type from
the value type of ``__extra__``::

    def f(movie: Movie) -> None:
        reveal_type(movie["name"])              # Revealed type is 'str'
        reveal_type(movie["novel_adaptation"])  # Revealed type is 'bool'

Interaction with PEP 705
------------------------

When ``__extra__`` is annotated with ``ReadOnly[]``, the extra items on the
TypedDict have the properties of read-only items. This affects subclassing
according to the inheritance rules specified in :pep:`PEP 705 <705#Inheritance>`.

Notably, a subclass of the TypedDict type may redeclare the value type of

> ``__extra__`` or extra items if the TypedDict type declares ``__extra__`` to be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``__extra__`` or of additional non-extra items if the TypedDict type declares ``__extra__`` to be
```

    * For each non-read-only item in ``B``, its value type is consistent with
      the corresponding value type in ``A``. [Edit: if the corresponding key
      with the same name cannot be found in ``A``, "__extra__" is considered the
      corresponding key.]

    * For each required key in ``B``, the corresponding key is required in ``A``.
      For each non-required key in ``B``, if the item is not read-only in ``B``,
      the corresponding key is not required in ``A``.
      [Edit: if the corresponding key with the same name cannot be found in
      ``A``, "__extra__" is considered to be non-required as the corresponding
      key.]

The following examples illustrate these checks in action.

``__extra__`` puts various restrictions on additional items for type
consistency checks::

    class Movie(TypedDict):
        name: str
        __extra__: int | None

    class MovieDetails(TypedDict):
        name: str
        year: NotRequired[int]
    
    details: MovieDetails = {"name": "Kill Bill Vol. 1", "year": 2003}
    movie: Movie = details  # Not OK. While 'int' is consistent with 'int | None',
                            # 'int | None' is not consistent with 'int'

> The value type of "year" is not found in ``Movie``, and that it is not

Reviewer: I don't follow this sentence. It might be enough to just have the examples and skip this paragraph of text. (Rename the second `MovieDetails` to something else.)

"read-only, not required, and of top value type (``ReadOnly[NotRequired[object]]``)"
thus it needs to be consistent with ``__extra__``'s value type and vice versa::

    class MovieDetails(TypedDict):
        name: str
        year: int | None

    details: MovieDetails = {"name": "Kill Bill Vol. 1", "year": 2003}
    movie: Movie = details  # Not OK. 'year' is not required in 'Movie',
                            # so it shouldn't be required in 'MovieDetails' either

> Because "year" is absent in ``Movie``, "__extra__" is considered the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because "year" is absent in ``Movie``, ``__extra__`` is considered the
```

> corresponding key. "year" being required violates the rule "For each required

Reviewer: ```suggestion
corresponding key. ``"year"`` being required violates the rule "For each required
```

key in ``B``, the corresponding key is required in ``A``".

When ``__extra__`` is defined to be read-only in a TypedDict type, it is possible 
for an item to have a narrower type than ``__extra__``'s value type.

    class Movie(TypedDict):
        name: str
        __extra__: ReadOnly[str | int]
    
    class MovieDetails(TypedDict):
        name: str
        year: NotRequired[int]

    details: MovieDetails = {"name": "Kill Bill Vol. 2", "year": 2004}
    movie: Movie = details  # OK. 'int' is consistent with 'str | int'.

This behaves the same way as :pep:`705` specified if ``year: ReadOnly[str | int]``
is an item defined in ``Movie``.

``__extra__`` as a pseudo-item follows the same rules that other items have,

> so when both TypedDict contains ``__extra__``, this check is naturally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so when both TypedDicts contain ``__extra__``, this check is naturally
```

type is consistent with ``VT``. It is an extension to this rule from the typing
spec::

    * A TypedDict with all ``int`` values is not consistent with
      ``Mapping[str, int]``, since there may be additional non-``int``
      values not visible through the type, due to structural subtyping.
      These can be accessed using the ``values()`` and ``items()``
      methods in ``Mapping``

For example::

    class MovieExtraStr(TypedDict):
        name: str
        __extra__: str

    extra_str: MovieExtraStr = {"name": "Blade Runner", "summary": ""}
    str_mapping: Mapping[str, str] = extra_str  # OK

    int_mapping: Mapping[str, int] = extra_int  # Not OK. 'int | str' is not consistent with 'int'
    int_str_mapping: Mapping[str, int | str] = extra_int  # OK

Furthermore, type checkers should be able to infer the precise return types of
``values()`` and ``items()`` on such TypedDict types::

    def fun(movie: MovieExtraStr) -> None:
        reveal_type(movie.items())  # Revealed type is 'dict_items[str, str]'
        reveal_type(movie.values())  # Revealed type is 'dict_values[str, str]'

Interaction with dict[KT, VT]

> --------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-----------------------------
```
(This is what's breaking the CI checks.)

<https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/2/objects.html#index-signatures>`__
syntax, which requires all properties' types to match the string index's type.
For example:

.. code-block:: typescript

    interface MovieWithExtraNumber {
        name: string // Property 'name' of type 'string' is not assignable to 'string' index type 'number'.
        [index: string]: number
    }

    interface MovieWithExtraNumberOrString {
        name: string // OK
        [index: string]: number | string
    }

This is a known limitation is discussed in `TypeScript's issue tracker
<https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript/issues/17867>`__,
where it is suggested that there should be a way to exclude the defined keys
from the index signature, so that it is possible to define a type like
``MovieWithExtraNumber``.

Reference Implementation
========================

pyanalyze has `experimental support
<https://github.com/quora/pyanalyze/blob/9bfc2c58467c87774a9950838402d2657b1486a0/pyanalyze/extensions.py#L590>`__
for a similar feature.

Reference implementation for this specific proposal, however, is not currently
available.

Acknowledgments
================

> Thanks to Jelle Zijlstra for sponsoring this PEP and providing review feedbacks,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to Jelle Zijlstra for sponsoring this PEP and providing review feedback,
```

Inheritance
-----------

The ``OtherFields[]`` annotated field (assuming its key is "__extra__") is inherited
the same way as a regular ``key: value_type`` field. The same rules from
:pep:`PEP 589 <589#inheritance>` apply.

    * Changing a field type of a parent TypedDict class in a subclass is not allowed.

> First, it is not allowed to change the type of ``__extra__`` in a subclass::

Author: If PEP 705 is accepted, `ReadOnly[]` on `OtherFields[]` will make it possible to refine the type in a subclass. However, I am unsure if this section is where the comment belongs to.
